=== PAGE 71 ===

[भाग प--खण्ड 3003 : भारत का UTI : असाधारण ्ň

(2) Whoever contravenes any other provision of these rules, for the contravention of which

no punishment has been provided either in the Act or in the rules, he shall be punished with

fine of two thousand rupees.

33. Power to relax: The Central Government may, after ascertaining the genuineness of

the compounding of a case or a Court decision stated in the application, | permit a

manufacturer or packer to pack for sale the packages for a reasonable period by relaxing

one or more provision of these Rules with such corrective measures as may be specified.

34. Repeal and savings.- (i) The Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged

Commodities) Rules, 2977 (herein under-referred to as the said rules) are hereby

repealed.

Provided that such repeal shall not affect:

(a) the previous operations of the said rules or anything done or omitted to be done

or suffered therein; or

(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the

said rules; or

(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed

against the said rules; or ;

(d) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,

‘obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid.

And any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or

enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said

rules had not been rescinded.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken or purported to have

been done or taken including approval of letter, exemption granted, fees collected, any

adjudication, enquiry or investigation commenced, license and registration of

manufacturers, dealers, importers of pre-packaged commodities, or show cause notice,

decision, determination, approval, authorisation issued, given or done under the said

rules shall if in force at the commencement of the said rules continue te be in force and

have effect as if issued, given or done under the corresponding provisions of these

=== PAGE 72 ===

bowed

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

rules.

(3) The provisions of these rules shall apply to any application made to the Central

Government or as the case may be the State Government under the said rules for

licence, registration of manufacturers, importers, dealers of pre-packaged commodities

pending at the commencement of these rules and to any proceedings consequent

thereon and to any registration granted in pursuance thereof.

(4) Any legal proceeding pending in any court under the said rules at the

commencement of these rules may be continued in that court as if these rules had not

been framed.

(5) Any appeal preferred to the Central Government or as the case may be the State

Government under the said rules and pending shall be deemed to have been made

under the corresponding provisions of these rules.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

[See Rule 2(e)}}

॥. Maximum permissible errors on net quantity declared by weight or volume.-

(2) The maximum permissible error, in excess or in deficiency, in the net quantity by weight or volume of any

commodity shall be as specified in Table I betow:-

[Part Il—Sec. आफ

TABLE-I

Maximum permissible errors on net quantities declared by weight or by volume

po N | Declared quantity Maximum permissible error In excess or in deficiency

gorm

As percentage of declared gorm

quantity | oO] — to 50 oo -

no 0 to 306 - 45

mo T00 to 200 COCs -

V ; | 00 wRio 300 CS [J

V) | OOS to 500 Fd -

; | 00 to 7000 Fo 35

Vil [Wont to T0000 उ0006 दिY

; (गए |. 00000 to 3000 इ5006 - T56

ix jore than 5000 |?” =

(2) The maximum permissible error specified as percentage shall be rounded off to the nearest one-tenth of a g or mi,

for a declared quantities less than or equal to L000 g or mi and to the next whole g or mi for declared quantities above

000 g or mi.

2. The maximum permissible errors on net quantity declared by length, area or number. - (i} The maximum

aia ee ' cet थक! AF aes Re a TC 4 (कप AIRPLANE कन्ययालजकनाका+

=== PAGE 73 ===

भाग Nae 3(3)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

के

‘ 

ee

Permissible error, IN excess of in deficiency, in the net quantity deciared in terms of length, area or number of any

Cofimddity not Specified in the First Scheduie shall be as specified in Table II below:-

TABLE 23

‘The maximum pétmissible errors on net quantities declared by length, area or number

डिƂक: ; TF| Quaritiy Decared Declared | Maximum permissible error in excess or int deficiel

P| ee iS of Tengu 8G OF declared quantity up to इ0 metre and thereafter इक of declared

quantity.

| inunits of area कट of dedared quantity up to उठ sq. métre and thereafter उ% ol

. dediared quantity.

pa | by number [Me लउब्तगव्वे वीक

THE SECOND SCHEDULE

{See rule 5)

Commodities to be packed in specified quantities

‘The following commodities shall be packed in such quantities. by weigit, measure or number as are specified in the

corresponding entries against them.

Sl. No.

.

900 ७0/44-0

Eommodities : Quantities in which td. be packed

3.

"00g, 2009, 3003, 400, $00,

600.9, 700 g, 800 9, 900g, ! kg,

2kg, 5 kg and 0 kg.

| 6009, 700g, 800g, 900g, 2 ka, 2 ka,

5 kg and 20 kg.

Biscuits

Bread including brewn

bread but exduding

bun.

Un-canned packages of

butter and margarine

25g, 509, 75g, 009, 509, 2009, 2509, 300g and thereafter in multiples

of 200g up to ई kg.

000 and there after in of multiples |009.

25 g, 50g, 00 9, 200 g, 500g, 4 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, and thereafter in

multiples of 5 kg.

=== PAGE 74 ===

गे THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY INDIA: [Pant [Part ISee, आग]ग]

6. Cereais and Pulses 4000, 2009, 5009, 3 kg, 2 kg, 5 kg and thereafter multiples of 5 kg

| 7. Coffee : 259, 50g, 00g, 200g, 250g, 500g, tkg and thereafter in multiples of ikg.

! 259, 50g, 2009, 25g 250g, 500g, ikg and thereafter in multiples of kg.

Materiais which may be

| निq constituted or 25g, 50 g, !00 g, i25g, 200 g, 500 5, t kg and thereafter in multiples of

_ reconstituted as | i kg.

! beverages.

50 g, 400 g, 200 9, 500 g, ६9, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg and thereafter in

रु 

i 

Edible Oils 

multiples of 5 kg If net quantity is declared by volume the same number in Vanaspati, हिî fters * 3 : filllliters or i, aS the case may be, If the net quantity is declared by | । ghee, butter cit ही ; निq ही _ Volume, then the equivalent quantity in terms of mass to be declared in

i | brackets in same size of letters/ numerals

: : = Below 50 no restriction, 50 g, 4000, 200g, 500 g, | kg and thereafter in an | Milk Powder. SOg 2 g, 4000, 200g g, Lkg

multiples of 500 g.

। Below 50 g no restriction, 509, 009, 200g, 500g,

2. 700g, अप, 4.5 kg, 2 kg and thereafter, in muitipies

| * Of kg.

| Rice(powdered), flour,

: ' ३000, 200g, , ikg, 2kg, 5 kg and ! 3. atta, rawa 00s, 2009, 5009, ikg, 2kg, 5 kg

thereafter in multiples of 5 kg. and sujt.

frm nas na cet .

“ | sot » Below 50g in multiples of 400, 50g, 00g, 200g, 500g, 7509, | ka, 2 kg, 5

| i | _kg and thereafter in multiples of 5 ka.

i} i

45. Soaps

{a} Laundry Soap 50g, 75g, 4000, and thereafter in multiples of 50g.

(b} Non-soapy 509, 75g, 4000, 4259, i509, 200g, 2509, 300g and thereafter in multiptes

detergent cakes/ bars. of ६009

(c) Toilet Soap

including alt kinds of § 25g, 50g, 75g, 4000, i25g, 50g and thereafter in multiples of 50g.

bath soap (cakes).

: 46. * Aerated soft drinks, . 65 mi (fruit based drinks only), इ00 mi, 25mi(fruit based drinks only), 50

: fnon-alecholic mi, 200 ml, 250 mi, 300 ml, 330mi{in cans only}, 500 ml, 750 ml, 4 iitre,

{ | * beverages. 4.5 litre, 2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre and 5 titre,

! ॥7. Minerat water and . !00 mi, ।50 ml, 200 mil, 250 mi, 300 mi, S00 mi, 750 ml, | litre, .5 litre, 2

ee ene विs operant विs की AP Bi a A A TO TE EE मै ला ATUL OL I । Vie af ae | .

=== PAGE 75 ===

( भाग [Gre 300] भारत का UTA: असाधारण vA)

drinking water

86. Cement in bags.

9. Paint varnish etc.

{a) Paint (other than

paste paint or solid

paint) varnish, varnish

stains, enamels.

(b) Paste paint and

solid paint

(c) Base paint:

(See Rule (4))

litre, 3 litre, 4 titre and 5 litre.

kg, 2 kg, 5 kg, 0 kg, 20 kg, 25 kg, 40 kg (for White cement only) and

50 kg.

50 ml, 00 mi, 200 mi, 500 mi, 4 litre, 2 litre, 3 litre, 4 litre, 5 litre and

thereafter in multiples of 5 litre.

5000, । kg, 2.5 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg, 5 kg, 7kg and thereafter multiple of 5 kg.

450 ml, 500 mi, 900 ml, 925 ml, 950 ml, 975 ml, 4 Jitre, 3.6 litre, 3.7 litre,

3.8 litre, 3.9 litre and 4 litre and no restriction above 4 litre."

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

Declaration of quantity in relation to commodities (sold by weight or volume) which may be qualified by the words “When

packed”

AIRINGS 

SI. No. Name of commodity

ही Lotions

OF SORPS वार

Cream (other than cream of milk)

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE

(See Rule 2(2))

Exceptions referred to in Rule 22(2)

i. The following commodities in packaged form may be sold by weight, measure or number as shown against the

commodity:-

TABLE

sl. Commodity Whether declaration to be expressed in terms

No, of weight, measures or number or two or more of them

श 2. 3.

. Aeroso} Products Weight

Acids in liquid form Weight or volume

Compressed or liquefied Weight and equivaient volume

=== PAGE 76 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I]—Sec. 3(i)]

2.

3.

4.

5.

46.

7.

8.

9.

20.

2i.

22.

23.

24,

25.

26.

gas(but not liquefied petroleum gas)

Curd

Electric Cables

Electric wire

Fencing wire

Fruits, ail kinds

Furnace oil

Non edible vegetable oil

Edible oil, Vanaspati

ghee and butter oil

Heavy residual fuel oil

Industrial diesel fuel

Honey, mait-extract,

golden syrup treacle

Ice cream and other

similar frozen products

Liquid chemicals

Liquefied petroleum gas

Nails, wood screws

Paints other than paste

paint or solid paint} Varnish

varnish stains, enamels

Paste paint, solid paint

Rasgulla, Gulabjamun

and ather sweet preparations

Ready-made garments

Sauces, all kinds

Tyres and tubes

Yam

Cosmetics including

creams, shampoo, lotions and perfumes

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE

Manner of Selection of Sample Packages

at stated temperature and pressure

Weight

Length or weight

Length or weight

Number or weight

Number or weight

Weight or volume

Weight or volume

Weight or volume

Weight

Volume

Weight

Volume

Weight or volume

Weight

Number or weight

Volume

Weight

Weight

Number

Weight

Number

Weight or length of yarn,

Weight or measure

i. For determination of the net quantity for any commodity contained in 2 package, the sample size shall be such as is

specified in the corresponding entry column 2 of the Table below against the lot size specified in Column of the said

Table.

Lot Size Sample Size

() (2)

Less than 4000 32

=== PAGE 77 ===

[भाग प[--खण्ड 3“) भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण रा

More than 4000 86

2. The sample shall be selected at random in accordance with the manner specified in paragraphs 3 and 4.

3. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained in a package it is necessary to take

samples of packages stored by the manufacture or packer in a ware house, go-down or at any other place, the sample

shall be selected at random, from ever lot of packages and shall be picked out from the top, bottom, center, right, left,

front and rear of the stocks so that the samples may adequately represent the packages in the jot.

4. Where, for the determination of the net quantity of any commodity contained in a package it is necessary to take

samples form the place where the package is being filled such samples shail be selected from among the package which

have already been filed, or in the alternatively, the requisite number of empty containers may be taken over and each of

them shall be adequately marked for proper identification and the tare weight of each container shall be accurately noted

and thereafter the marked containers shall be introduced at random in the packing process so that, after the packages

are filled in may be possible to determine the net quantity

Explanation: In this schedule ‘Sample size’ means the umber of packages to be selected as sampie.

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE

(See Rule क9)

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities contained in Packages

Part-I - Equipment

4. Equipments required- (i} The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer authorized by or undér ‘the Act, to

determine the net quantity; of commodity contained in any package, shall be provided by the concerned Government

with adequate equipments and facilities to carry out his work to the required degree of accuracy in an Expedient and

efficient manner.

900 GI/M4—

=== PAGE 78 ===

koutt

78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY INDIA __{Pat [Parr IS. 3(i)]

wt yas लगन

~~ (@)2 The equipments, equipments, referred too in i sub-paragraph sub-paragraph (I), ()shall shall ordinarily ordinary consist consist of ofworking wanastandard dnda weights maa and balances, =

or any other weight or measure declared by the Director to be suitable for determining the net quantity contained in the

concemed package.

(3) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, before determining the net quantity contained in any

package, ensure that the working standards and other equipments are functioning properly.

2. Working standards to be ordinarily used.-(i) Ordinarily, working standards and other weights and measures,

duly verified shail be used for determining the net quantities contained in packages and the errors, if any, in relation to

the net quantity declared on the package.

Provided that, where it is necessary to use the weights and measures, owned or controlled by the manufacturer, packer

or wholesale dealer as the case may be such weights and measures, shallbe used unless the

maximum permissible error of such weights and measures is twenty per cent or less of the maximum error permitted n

relation to the net quantity of the commodity contained in the packages.

(2) It shall be the duty of every manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer to render such assistance the Director,

Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer as the Director or other authorized person may require in order carrying out his

duties expeditiously and efficiently.

(3) Where any weight, measure or other equipment, owned or controlled by the manufacturer, packer or

wholesale dealer is used by the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer for the determination or the net

quantity contained in any package, such weight, measure or other equipment shall not be released by the Director or

other authorized person until his work is completed.

Part-II - Instructions with regard te the determination of quantity and error at manufacturer's or packer's

premises.

3. (4) If empty tare packages are available, one such package shall be taken and tare package weight determined. If

sn vpeeeaae Pe eed ii eli HE ee. ene eran. cx ciel ei AIO Ree -वावामवलक- मकनककान्यकर फाल/ i t

० जता,

=== PAGE 79 ===

[भाग Il—ares 30) ] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

the tare package weight is equal to or less than three-tenths of the maximum permissible error for the concerned

commodity of that quantity, it shall be assumed that the tare package weight so determined is valid for all the

other packages in the sample, and the sample packages shall then be weighed for gross weight, and thereafter the net

weight of commodity contained in each Package shail be obtained by subtracting the tere package weight from the gross

Package weight. If the tare package weight so determined is more than three tenths of the maximum permissible error in

relation to the commodity for that quantity, weight of four emptier tare packages shail be determined. If the difference

between the maximum tare package weight and the minimum tare package weight of the five samples is equal to or less

than four tenths of the maximum permissible error allowed for that commodity for that quantity, the tare weight of

the package shal! be taken as equal to the average of the five tare package weights. The gross weight of the package in

the sample shall then be determined and the average tare package weight shall be subtracted from the gross package

weight to obtain the net contents of the commodity in each package, in the sample. However, when the difference in the

five individual tare weights of the packages exceeds the limit of four tenths of the maximum permissible error specified

above, the procedure specified in sub-paragraph (4) or sub-paragraph (5), as the case may be, shall be adopted for

determining the net quantity of individuat packages.

(2) In the absence of empty tare packages, one package from the sample shail be opened and the net weight of the

commodity and the tare weight of the package determined. If the tare weight of the package is equal to or less than

three-tenth of the maximum permissibie error for that concerned commodity of that quantity, it shall be assumed that the

tare weight of one package so determined is valid for all the other packages in the sample, and the remaining packages

shall then be weighed for gross weight, and thereafter the net weight of commodity contained in each package shall be

obtained by subtracting the tare weight from the gross weight.

(3) If the tare weight of the package specified in sub-paragraph (2) is more than three-tenths of the maximum

permissible error in relation to that commodity, four more packages in the samples shall be opened and the net

weight of the commodity in each package as well as the tare weight of each package shall be determined. If the

=== PAGE 80 ===

INA THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY EXTRAORDINARY ORDINARY _{Par [ताकत] Ste. 300)(i)]

difference between the maximum tare weight and the minimum tare weight of five samples is equal to or less than four￾tenths of the maximum permissible error for that commodity of that quantity, the tare weight of the package shall be

taken as equal to the arithmetic mean of the five tare weights. The gross weight of the packages in the sample shalt

then be determined to the requisite accuracy and the average tare weight of the contained shail be subtracted from the

gross weight to obtain the net contents of the commodity in each package in the sample.

(4) Where it is found on examining the First package, as described in sub-paragraph (2) that the tare weight of the

container exceeds the limits specified in sub-paragraph (2) and sub-paragraph (3} and the determination of net contents,

cannot be carried out without opening the remaining packages, or it is not, possible to use the procedure to use the

procedure described in sub-paragraph (5) the size of the sample to be examined shall be restricted to that indicated in

column (2) , in accordance with the lot indicated in column () of Table of the Fifth Schedule and the determination of

net quantity shall be carried out by opening aif the packages in the sample.

(S) Where it is likely that the Process of determination of the actual net quantity may be destructive and it is possible to

feed empty package into the Packing process without affecting the results, the following procedure shall be used:

(a) the number of empty Packages, depending upon the size of the lot, in accordance with columns () and (2) of Table

of the Fifth Schedule shall be selected:

(0) the empty package shall be marked suitably to identify them from the other packages;

(c) the weight of each empty Package, with its other parts which are to be fitted on it after it is filled shall be determined

and the weight suitably recorded on the empty package and also on the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule;

(d) the empty package shall then be filled by introducing them in a random manner in the packing process, and such

introduction shall be adequately spread over the duration in accordance with which :the size of the fot is determined;

(९) the marked packages shall be taken out after completion of the filling and sealing operations and each such filled

Package shall be weighed again to the requisite accuracy;

(f} the net quantity shall be obtained by deaucting the tare weight determined in accordance with clause (c) from the

gross weight.

(6) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter results of this examination of gross weight, net

=== PAGE 81 ===

[भाग [lars 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण |!

weight and tare weight in the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule along with such other observation as he may

wish to make on the basis of his examination.

4. Determination of liquid contents by volume.-(i) If the specific gravity of the liquid commodity filled in packages

remains sufficiently constant for a fot and it is possible to determine accurately its specific gravity the method of

determination of net contents by weight, described in paragraph 3 may be used.

(2) If the method described in sub-paragraph (4) is not feasible the containers shall be opened and the contents of each

package poured out carefully into the appropriate volume measure.

(3) The reading of the actual net volume of the commodity in every package shall be noted carefully and recorded in the

Form specified in the Seventh Schedule.

5. Verification of length of commodities.-(i) The sample shall be selected in the manner specified in the Fifth

Schedule.

(2) If it is not possible to measure the dimensions with out opening the package, the package shall be opened.

(3) The length of the commodity shall be measured by means of a calibrated steel tape of suitable length.

(4) If the actual length of the commodity is so great that it is not possible to measure it with the tape measure and a

suitable length measuring instrument is available on the premises, that instrument shall be use, after duly calibrating

it by suitable means, with the steel tape serving ala working standard of length.

(5) The reading of the actual length of the commodity in every package shail be noted carefully and recorded in the

Form specified in the Seventh Schedule.

6. Verification of commodities packed by number.- The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall

take packages from the sample drawn by him in the manner specified in the Fifth Schedule and determine the extent of

error, by actual counting in each such package and may, for that purpose open all packages.

7. Checking of other dectarations.- (i) The declarations made on the package or on the label affixed thereto, shall

be examined with a view to ascertaining whether such declarations conform to these rules and may be ensured either

at the factory level or at the depot of the factory -

=== PAGE 82 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY INDIA [Pant [Part ७८ 3(0)] आफ

sed

(2)The additional declarations made on the package or on the label affixed thereto in "@yThe addon! delaras made onthe padage or on the libel ated eo meatal of item (f} and (g) of sub￾rule () of rule 6 shall also be examined to ascertain whether they are adequate.

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE

Form A

Weight Checking - Data Sheet

A

Particulars of Package Name of Manufacturer/ Packer

| Address Price | Month] Year

B Lot Size: ample Size:

Commodity Classification Schedule First/ Second

Class A/ B

Maximum permissible error in percentage

io ample “Gross ore Net Remai

No. Weight Weight Weight/ error

eight nS बी

Checking Data 200

D

Results Declared Wt. Avg.

wt

E

GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE

COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE

THEREUNDER

F

Signature and name of the Signature and name of

Mmanufacturer/

authorized person packer authorized by

manufacturer or

any competent witness

Place:

Designation:

Name:

Time:

Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall bear the signatures specified in

Part F.

मत 

meson 

के स्का कम Uy T° er ।|0 कै से कर, 

or 

Beth rere काल 406OE AL RE पा बुना

=== PAGE 83 ===

[ भाग ह--खण्ड 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 8

Form B

Volume/ Length Checking - Data Sheet

A

Particulars of Package Name of Manufacturer/ Packer

| | Address] | | Price] [Month] | Year

B ot Size: ample Size:

Commodity Classification Schedule First/ Second

Class A/ B

Maximum permissible error in percentage

Cc ample Gross are Net Remai

No. Weight Weight Weight/ error

Volume/ 

Checking Data 

Lengtl mo

200

D

Results Declared Volume/ Length Avg. Volume/ Length

E

GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE

COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE

THEREUNDER

F

Signature and name of the Signature and name of manufacturer?

authorized person” packer authorized by manufacturer or

any competent witness

Place:

Designation:

Name:

Time:

Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall

bear the signatures specified in Part F.

[F. No. WM-9(6)/200-Pt.]

RAKESH KACKER, Spl. Secy,

.

Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Dethi-I 0064

and Published by the Controller of Publications, Dethi-0054.
