=== PAGE 38 ===

aed

38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY (Parr ll—Sec. आग

lids दे हलवा के विs ieee! Be ने

| ;

deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable

consideration, and includes a commission agent who carries on such business on

behalf of any principal, but does not include a manufacturer who manufactures

any commodity which is sold or distributed in a packaged form except where

such commodity is sold by such manufacturer to any other person other than a

dealer ;

(c) “lot” means —

(i) in the case of packages which have been stored, the total number of such

packages stored; and

(ii) in the case of packages which are on or at the end of the packing line, the

maximum hourly output of packages,’

(d) “manufacturer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form, means a

person who or a firm which produces, makes or manufactures such commodity

and includes a person or firm which puts, or causes to be put, any mark on any

packaged commodity, not produced, made or manufactured by him or it, and the

mark claims the commodity in the package to be a commodity produced, made

or manufactured by such perscn or firm as the case may be;

(e) “Maximum permissible error’, in relation to the quantity contained in an

individual package, means an error in deficiency which, subject to the provision

of these rules, does not exceed the limits specified in the First Schedule;

(f) “net quantity”, in relation to commodity contained in a package, means the

quantity by weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that

package, excluding the packaging or wrappers;

० ten ee eee ices SEL UE SE AAO Ses aba

=== PAGE 39 ===

CS भाग [ars 300] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39

(g) “packer” means a person who, or a firm which pre-packs any commodity,

whether in any bottle, tin, wrapper or otherwise, in units suitable for sale

whether wholesale or retail;

(h) “principal display panel”, in relation to a package, means the total surface

area of the package where the information required under these rules are to be

given in the following manner, namely:-

(i) all the information could be grouped together and given at one place; or

(ii) the pre-printed information could be grouped together and given in one

place and on line information grouped together in other place;

(i) “quantity” in relation to commodity contained in a package, means the

quantity by weight, measure or number of such commodity contained in that

package;

(j) “retail dealer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form means a dealer

who directly sells such packages to the consumer and includes, in relation to

packages as are sold directly to the consumer, a wholesale dealer who makes

such direct sale to the consumer.

(k) “retail package” means the packages which are intended for retail sale to the

ultimate consumer for the purpose of consumption of the commodity contained

therein and includes the imported packages :

Provided that for the purposes of this clause, the expression ‘ultimate consumer’

shall not include industrial or institutional consumers,

(i) “retail sale”, in relation to a commodity, means the sale, distribution or

delivery of such commodity through retail. sales shops, agencies or other

=== PAGE 40 ===

40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Sec. 3(i)]

instrumentalities for consumption by an individual or a group of individuals or

any other consumer;

(m) “retail sale price” means the maximum price at which the commodity in

packaged form may be sold to the ultimate consumer and the price shall be

printed on the package in the manner given below;

‘Maximum or Max. retail price Rs...../=...... inclusive of all taxes or in the form

MRP RS....../ See incl., of ail taxes after taking into account the fraction of less

than fifty paise to be rounded off to the preceding rupee and fraction of above

50 paise and up to 95 paise to the rounded off to fifty paise;

(n) “section” means a section of the Act;

(0) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules;

(p) “standard package” means a package containing the specified quantity of a

commodity;

(q) “wholesale dealer” in relation to any commodity in packaged form means a

dealer who does not directly sell such commodity to any consumer but

distributes or sells such commodity through one or more intermediaries;

(r) “wholesale package” means a package containing- (i) a number of retail

packages, where such first mentioned package is intended for sale, distribution

or delivery to an intermediary and is not intended for sale direct to a single

consumer; or

(ii) a commodity sold to an intermediary in bulk to enable such intermediary to

sell, distribute or deliver such commodity to the consumer in similar quantities;

or

Pee LL हम्क fen SRI AEE RLY Nk RRNA Ah} SLUR «0: या. “ORIN samme denne

=== PAGE 41 ===

[भाग --खण्ड 3003 भारत का राजफत्र : असाधारण 4l

(iii) packages containing ten or more than ten retail packages provided that the

retail packages are ‘labeled as required under the rules.

(s) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Act,

shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act.

CHAPTER दा

PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PACKAGES INTENDED FOR RETAIL SALE

3. Applicability of the Chapter.- The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply

to,-

(a) packages of commodities containing quantity of more than 25 kg or 25 litre

excluding cement and fertilizer sold in bags up to 50 kg; and

(b) packaged commodities meant for industrial consumers or institutional

consumers.

Explanation :- For the purpose of this rule,-

i) “institutional consumer” means the institutional consumer like transportation,

Airways, Railways, Hotels, Hospitals or any other service institutions who buy

packaged commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that institution;

ii) “industrial consumer” means the industrial consumer who buy packaged

commodities directly from the manufacturer for use by that industry.

4. Regulation for pre-packing and sale etc. of commodities in packaged

form. - On and from the commencement of these rules, no person shall pre￾pack or cause or permit to be pre-packed any commodity for sale, distribution or

delivery uniess the package in which the commodity is pre-packed bears thereon,

900 Gi/i-6

=== PAGE 42 ===

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Parr [I—Sec. 3¢i)]

or on a label is securely affixed thereto, such declarations as are required to be

made under these rules.

Explanation.- The existence of packages without the declaration of retail sale

price within the manufacturer's premises shall not be construed as a violation of

these rules and it shall be ensured that all packages leaving the premises of

manufacturer for their destination shall have declaration of retail sale price on

them as required in this rule.

5. Specific commodities to be packed and sold in recommended

standard packages. - The commodities specified in the Second Schedule shall

be packed for sale, distribution or delivery in such standard quantities as are

specified in that Schedule:

Provided that if a commodity specified in the Second Schedule is packed in a size

other than that prescribed in that Schedule, a declaration that ‘Not a standard

pack size under the Legal Metrology (packaged Commodities) Rules, 20 or

‘non standard size under the Legal Metrology (packaged Commodities) Rules,

20i' shall be made prominently on the label of such package.

6. Declarations to be made on every package. - (i) Every package shall

bear thereon or on label securely affixed thereto, a definite, plain and

conspicuous declaration made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter

as, to-

(a) the name and address of the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is

not the packer, the name and address of the manufacturer and packer and for

any imported package the name and address of the importer shall be mentioned

co Ste ei ee eae ae a ee oete sins iene: hx esa uso ena. ee

=== PAGE 43 ===

[ भाग are 30] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43

Explanation I.- If any name and address of a company is mentioned on the

label without any qualifying words ‘manufactured by‘ or ‘packed by’, it shall be

presumed that such name and address shall be that of the manufacturer and the

liability shall be determined accordingly;

Explanation IT. - If the brand name and address of the brand owner appear on

the label as a marketer, then the brand owner shall be held responsible for any

violation of these rules and action as may be required shall be initiated against

the deemed manufacturer and in the event of more than one name and address

appearing in the label, prosecution shall be launched against the manufacturer

indicated on the label in the first place and not against all of them.

Explanation III. - In respect of packages containing food articles, the

provisions of this sub-rule shall not apply, and instead, the requirement of the

Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 4954 (37 of |954) and the rules made there

under shail apply

(b) The common or generic names of the commodity contained in the package

and in case of packages with more than one product, the name and number or

quantity of each product shall be mentioned on the package.

(c) The net quantity, in terms of the standard unit of weight or measure, of the

commodity contained in the package or where the commodity is packed or sold

by number, the number of the commodity contained in the package shall be

mentioned.

(d) The month and year in which the commodity is manufactured or pre-packed

or imported shall be mentioned in the package:

=== PAGE 44 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY ETE OF [Parr INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY (रत 3(i)]()]

Provided that for packages containing food articles, the provisions of the

Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 954 (37 of 954) and the rules made there

under shall apply:

Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall apply in case of packages

containing seeds which are labeled and certified under the provisions of the

Seeds Act, 966 (54 of 966) and the rules made there under:

Provided that a manufacturer may indicate the month and year using a rubber

stamp without overwriting:

Provided also that for packages containing cosmetics products, the provisions of

the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 945 shall apply.

(e) the retail sale price of the package;

Provided that for packages containing alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquor,

the State Excise Laws and the rules made there under shall be applicable within

the State in which it is manufactured and where the state excise laws and rules

made there under do not provide for declaration of retail sale price, the

provisions of these rules shall apply.

(f) Where the sizes of the commodity contained in the package are relevant, the

dimensions of the commodity contained in the package and if the dimensions of

the different pieces are different, the dimensions of each such different piece

shall be mentioned.

(g) such other matter as are specified in these rules:

Provided that --

(A) no declaration as to the month and year in which the commodity is

=== PAGE 45 ===

[भाग [are 300] सारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45

manufactured or pre-packed shall be required to be made on--

(i) any package containing bidi or incense sticks;

(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of i4.2kg or 5kg, bottled and

marketed by a public sector undertaking;

(B) where any packaging material bearing thereon the month in which any

commodity was expected to have been pre-packed is not exhausted during that

month, such packaging material may be used for pre-packing the concerned

commodity produced or manufactured during the next succeeding month and

not there after, but the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that such

packaging material could not be exhausted during the period aforesaid by reason

of any circumstance beyond the control of the manufacturer or packer as the

case may be extend the time during which such packaging material may be

used, and , where any such packaging material is exhausted before the expiry of

the month indicated thereon, the packaging material intended to be used during

the next succeeding month may be used for pre-packing the concerned

commodity:

Provided that the said provision shall not apply to the packages containing food

products, where the ‘Best before or Use before’ period is ninety days or fess from

the date of manufacture or packing.’

(C) no declaration as to the retail sale price shall be required to be made on

(i) any package containing bidi;

(ii) any domestic liquefied petroleum gas cylinder of which the price is covered

under the Administrative Price Mechanism of the Government.

=== PAGE 46 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY NIA [Patt [Parr परत 30)]

Explanation I: The month and the year in which commodity is pre-packed may

be expressed either in words, or by numerals indicating the month and the year,

or by both.

(2) Every package shall bear the name, address, telephone number, E-mail

address, if available, of the person who can be or the office which can be,

contacted, in case of consumer complaints. .

(3) It shall not be permissible to affix individual stickers on the package for

altering or making declaration required under these rules:

Provided that for reducing the Maximum Retail Price (MRP), a sticker with the

revised lower MRP (inclusive of all taxes) may be affixed and the same shail not

cover the MRP declaration made by the manufacturer or the packer, as the case

may be, on the label of the package.

(4) It shall be permissible to use stickers for making any decleration other than

the decleration required to be made under these rules,

(5) Where a commodity consists of a number of components and these

components are packed in two or more units, for sale as a single commodity, the

declaration required to be made under sub-rule ([) shall appear on the main

package and such package shall also carry information about the other

accompanying packages or such declaration may be given on individual packages

and intimation to that effect may be given on the main package and if the

components are sold as spare parts, all declarations shall be given on each

package.

7. Principal display panel-its area, size and letter etc.- (4) In the case of a

ea Le “.. sila Fe oe विs nl Reon न न्वकाप- atin अ : x ohio ao sy peUpeanie named A pi A: | 7 >

=== PAGE 47 ===

[भाग ars 3(i)] भारत का WATT : असाधारण 47

package having a capacity of five cubic centimeters or less, the principal display

panel may be a card or tape affixed firmly to the package and shall bear the

required information.

(2) The height of any numeral in the declaration required under these rules, on

the principal display panel shall not be less than,-

(i) as shown in Table-I, if the net quantity is declared in terms of weight or

volume;

(ii) as shown in Table-II, if the net quantity is declared in terms of length, area

or number. .

(3) The height of letters in the declaration shall not be less than i mm height

and when blown, formed, molded, embossed or perforated, the height of letters

shall not be less than 2 mm.

Provided that the width of the letter or numeral shall not be less than one third

of its height, except in the case of numeral * ' and letters (i), (I) and (I);

TABLE-I

Minimum height of numeral

Serial Net quantity in Minimum height in mm

Number weight / volume

Normal case .| When blown , formed,

molded, embossed or

perforated on container

| | Upto 200q/ g/ ml mi_| 2 |

2 Above 2000/ mi 2 4

and upto 500g/ml

3 Above 5009/ ml 4 rT 6 |

=== PAGE 48 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Parr ll-—Sec. 3(i)]

TABLE-II

Minimum height of numeral

Serial Net quantity in length, Minimum height in mm

Number area or number,

area of principal display

panel

Normal case When blown ,

formed, molded,

embossed or

perforated on

container

| Upto 00 cm? ग 2

2 Above 00 cm? and 2 4

__upto 500 cm?

3 Above 500 cm? and 4 6

upto 2500 cm?

4 Above 2500 cm? 6 6

(4) The provisions under sub-rule (2) to (3) shall not apply to a package if the

information to be specified on such package under this rule is also required to be

given by or under any other law for the time being in force.

8. Declaration where to appear.-

(3) Every declaration required to be made under these rules shall appear on the

principal display panel.

Provided that the area surrounding the quantity declaration shall be free from

printed information.

(a) above and below by a space equal to at least the height of the numeral in

the declaration, and

(0) to the left and right by a space at least twice the height of numeral in the

declaration.

(2) For scft drink, ready to serve fruit beverages or the like, the bottle which is

returnable by the consumer for being refilled, the retail sale price may be

Wont Hae ।- Ae RAS दे RRA ths 9d नासिĮक egestas.ete,

=== PAGE 49 ===

[भाग [ere 300] भारत का UAT : असाधारण

““ndicated indicated either on the crownrown cap, or or on on the the bottle boti or or on onbothth and and ifthe if the retail rtail

sale price is indicated on the crown cap or the bottle, it is sufficient to indicate

the retail sale price in the form of 'MRP Rs..../ ®...'

9. Manner in which declaration shall be made.- (i) Every declaration which

is required to be made on a package under these rules shall be --

(a) legible and prominent;

(b) numerals of the retail sale price and net quantity declaration shall be printed,

painted or inscribed on the package in a colour that contrasts conspicuously with

the background of the label;

Provided that,--

(a) where any label information is blown, formed or moulded on a glass or

plastic surface such information need not be required to be presented in a

contrasting colour;

(b) where any declaration on a package is printed either in the form of hand￾writing or hand-script, such declaration shall be clear, unambiguous and legible. °

(2) No declaration shall be made so as to require it to be read through any liquid

commodity contained in the package.

(3) Where a package is provided with an outside container or wrapper such

container or wrapper shall also contain all the declarations which are required to

appear on the package except where such container or wrapper itself is

transparent and the declarations on the package itself are easily readable

through such outside container or wrapper.

Provided that no such declarations on the inner package as required under the

900 ७/4--7

=== PAGE 50 ===

x THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Parr Il—Sec. आए

said rules is required if the inner package does not contain any declaration on its

outer cover.

(4) The particulars of the declarations required to be specified under this rule on

a package shail either be in Hindi in Devnagri script or in English:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shall prevent the use of any

other language in addition to Hindi or English language.

40. Declaration of name and address of the manufacturer, etc.-(4)

Subject to the provisions of rule 6, every package kept, offered or exposed for

sale or sold shall bear conspicuously on it, the name and complete address of the

manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is not the packer, the name and

address of the manufacturer and the packer and in case of imported packages,

the name and address of the importer:

Provided that for packages of capacity 5 cubic cm or less, it shall be a sufficient

compliance of this sub-rule, if a mark or inscription which would enable the

consumer to identify the manufacturer or packer or the importer, as the case

may be, is made on the package:

Provided further that where any Commodity manufactured outside India is

packed in India, the package shall also contain on the principal display panel the

name and complete address of the packer or the importer in India.

Explanation.- In this sub-rule, ' complete address’ means, the postal address at

which the factory is situated, and, in any other case, the name of the street,

number {if any) assigned to the premises of the manufacturer or packer and

bbe dL foes gum sone woo open ry somone कान महल न 3० विs दे विs; 2४ के की aiiecidainaianiiiaaneinies ssatoen sn anced

=== PAGE 51 ===

[ भाग Hare 3(i)] भारत का Wa: असाधारण श्र

=—Shor eithe the name nae of the city dyand anState where wre the business business is i carried carried onon by thehe

manufacturer or packer or the Postal Index Number [PIN] Code so that a

consumer can identify and locate the manufacturer or packer or importer, as the

case may be. .

(2) The name of the manufacturer or packer or importer shall be the actual

corporate name, or if not incorporated, the name under which the business is

conducted by such manufacturer or packer or importer in India.

॥4, Generali provisions relating to declaration of quantity—(i) In

declaring the net quantity of the commodity contained in a package, the weight

of wrappers and materials other than the commodity shall be excluded.--

(2)Where a commodity in a package is not likely to undergo any variation in

weight or measure, on account of the environmental conditions, the quantity

declared on the package shall correspond to the net quantity which will be

received by the consumer, and the declaration of quantity of such package shall

not be qualified by the words 'when packed’ or the like.

(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-rule (4), where a commodity in package is

likely to undergo variations in weight or measure on account of environmental

conditions and such variation is negligible, the declaration of quantity in relation

to such package shall be made after taking into account such variation so that

the consumer may receive not less than the net quantity of

the commodity as declared on the package, and the declaration of quantity on

such package shail not also be qualified by the words ‘when packed’ or the like.

(4) The declaration of quantity in relation to commodities which ‘are likely to

. nn

=== PAGE 52 ===

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Parr Il-—Sec. आए

“undergo significant variations in weight or measures on accoaa op significant variations in weight or measures on account of

environmental or other conditions may be qualified by the words “when packed”,

as specified in the Third Schedule.

4.2. Manner in which declaration of quantity shall be.—() The declaration

of quantity shall be expressed in terms of such unit of weight, measure or

number or a combination of weight, measure or number as would give an

accurate and adequate information to the consumer with regard to the quantity

of the commodity contained in the package.

(2) Except in the cases of commodities specified in the Fourth Schedule, the

declaration of quantity shail be in terms of the unit of -

(a) mass, if the commodity is solid, semi-solid, viscous or a mixture of solid and

liquid;

(b) length, if the commodity is sold by linear measure;

(c) area, if the commodity is sold by area measure; -

(d) volume, if the commodity is liquid or is sold by cubic measure; or

(e) number, if the commodity is sold by number:

(3) Where the declaration of quantity has been made in terms of mass, the

manufacturer or importer or, as the case may be, the packer may, at his option

make an additional declaration on the package as to the number of commodities

contained in the package.

(4) Where the declaration of quantity by weight or measure or number is not

sufficient to give to the consumer full information with regard to the dimensions

or number of commodity contained in the package, such declaration shall be

accompanied by a declaration of the dimensions or number, or both, where

oe er व wo sapeee cage ees सका 

2 i 

Wem es व: 40 कक asatesesun cet f 7

=== PAGE 53 ===

[भाग [lave 3()] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

- necessary, of the commodity contained in the package.

(5) Where it is necessary to communicate to the consumer any additional

information about the commodity contained in a package, such information shall

also appear on the same panel in which the other information, as required by

these rules, have been indicated.

(6) The declaration of quantity shall not contain any word or expression which

tends to create an exaggerated, misleading or inadequate impression as to the

quantity of the commodity contained in the package, for example, words or

expressions like-'minimum’, ‘not less than’, ‘average’, ‘about’, approximately’ or

other words of a similar nature.

(7) For packages having capacity 5 cubic cm or less, the declaration of quantity

shall be made on a tag, card, tape, or any other similar device affixed to the

container in such manner that it cannot be removed without opening the

container and every such tag, card, tape or other device shall contain mark or

inscription which will enable the. consumer to identity the manufacturer or

packer, as the case may be.

॥3. Statement of units of weight, measure or number.- (i) The units of

weight or measure or number shall be specified in accordance with the units

specified in sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), as the case may be.

(2) When expressing a quantity less than,-

(a) one kilogram, the unit of weight shall be the gram;

(b) one metre, the unit of length shail be the centimetre;

(c) one square metre, the unit of area shall be the square decimetre;

=== PAGE 54 ===

bon he a

l| s

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. 3(i)]

*==(d) “one on cubic cic metre, me, the te unit of ofvolume volushall shal be one cubic cab centimetre; cenc SS

Han 4am —e wot व विsंग दी! कार महा जि

(6) one cubic decimetre, the unit of volume shall be the cubic centimetre;

(f) one litre, the unit of volume shall be the millilitre.

(3) When expressing a quantity of equal to or more than-

(8) one kilogram, the unit of weight shall be the kilogram and any fraction of a

kilogram shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multiples of kilogram or in

terms of grams;

(b) one metre, the unit of length shall be the metre and any fraction of a metre

shall be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multipies of the metre or in terms

of centimetre;

(0) square metre, the unit of the area shall be the square metre and any fraction

of a square metre shail be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-muitiple of the

square metre.

(d) cubic metre, the unit of volume shall be the cubic metre and any fraction of a

cubic metre shall be expressed in terms of decimal sub-multiple of the cubic

metre;

(e) one fitre, the unit of volume shall be the litre and any fraction of a litre shall

be expressed in terms of decimal of sub-multipie of the litre:

Provided that where the quantity to be expressed is equal to one kilogram, one

metre, one square metre, one cubic decimetre, one cubic metre or one litre, as

the case may be, such quantity may be expressed at the option of the

manufacturer or the packer or the importer, as the case may be, in terms of

gram, centimetre, square decimetre, cubic centimetre, cubic decimetre or

sie सा 00 5 ee

=== PAGE 55 ===

Cwcmers Ihave 300] 3] भारत TT का राजपत्र ; : असाधारण असाधारण

6 as the case may be.

(4) No number called the dozen, score, gross, great gross or the like shall be

specified or indicated on any package.

(5) Symbol of units:-(i) No system of units other than the International System

of Units shall be used in furnishing the net quantity of the package;

(ii) For items sold by number the symbol should be N or U.

4. Declarations with regard to dimensions of certain commodities.-

Where a package contains ‘commodities like bed-sheets, hemmed fabric

materials, dhoties, sarees, napkins, pillow-covers, towels, table cloths or similar

other commodities, the number and the dimensions of finished size of such

commodities shall also be declared on the package or on the label affixed

thereto:

Provided that where the package contains more than one piece of different

dimensions, the package shall also contain a declaration as to the. dimensions

and the retail sale price of each such piece:

Provided further that the dimensions of the commodities and the retail sale price .

thereof shall also be marked on each individual piece.

5. Declaration with regard to dimensions and weight to be made on

packages in certain cases.- Where the dimensions and weight, or

combination thereof, of a commodity has or have a relationship to the price of

that commodity, the declaration of quantity on the package containing such

commodity, shall also include a declaration as to such dimensions, weight or

=== PAGE 56 ===

% THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Sgc. 3(i)]

“combination. combination. #8 Oe

46. Declarations to be made with regard to the number of usable

sheets to be stated.-In the case of a package containing sheets like aluminum

foil, facial tissues, waxed paper, toilet paper or any other type of sheet, the

declaration of quantity on the package shall also include a statement as to the

number of usable sheets contained in the package and the dimensions of each

such sheet.

7. Declarations with regard to the dimensions of container type

commodities.--

The commodities shall be expressed as bags, boxes, cups, pans or the like

designed and sold in retail trade for being used as containers for other materials

or objects and shall be labeled with the declaration of quantity as follows.--

(i) for bag-type commodities, the number of bags which the package may

contain, followed by linear dimensions of the bags, whether packaged ina

perforated roll or otherwise;

(i) for square, oblong, rectangular or similarly shaped containers, the number of

containers which the package may contain, followed by length, width, and if

required, depth of the container.

(iti) for circular or generally round-shaped containers, not being cups or the like

the number of commodities contained therein followed by diameter and, if

Loved dd ee काना... 04] aban क० Mi at a a iat Ha sd deal Ay akon a कक | दिY ” जैक eee ie ie) a ot a ER, ३6 4 #कल+ लाइव ़Ǐनासासकना काया ।

=== PAGE 57 ===

[भाग प-खण्ड 300] भारत का राजपत्र :; असाधारण शा

necessary, depth of the container.

(iv) When the use of a container is related by label references, the standard

weight or measure, to the capability of the container to hold a specific quantity

of commodity or a class of commodities such references shall be included in the

declaration of quantity.

48. Provisions relating to wholesale dealer and retail dealers.-() No

wholesale dealer or retail dealer or importer shall sell, distribute, deliver, display

or store for sale any commodity in the packaged form unless the package

complies with in all respects, the provisions of the Act and these rules.

(2) No retail dealer or other person including manufacturer, packer, importer and

wholesale dealer shall make any sale of any commodity in packed form at a price

exceeding the retail sale price thereof.

(3) Where, after any commodity has been pre-packed for sale, any tax payable

in relation to such commodity is revised, the retail dealer or any other person

shall not make any retail sale of such commodity at a price exceeding the revised

retail sale price, communicated to him by the manufacturer, or where the

manufacturer is not the packer, the packer, and it shail be, the duty of the

manufacturer or packer as the case may be, to indicate by not less than two

advertisements in one or more newspapers and also by circulation of notices to

the dealers and to the Director in the Central Government and Controllers of

Legal Metrology in the States and Union Territories, the revised prices of such

packages but the difference between the price marked on the package and the

revised price shall not, in any case, be higher than the extent of increase in the

tax or in the case of imposition of fresh tax higher than the fresh tax so imposed:

Provided that publication in any newspaper, of such revised price shall not be

necessary where such revision is due to any increase in, or imposition or, any tax

payable under any law made by the State Legislatures:

900 Gi/4i—8

=== PAGE 58 ===

38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Sec, 3(i)}

«Provided further that the retail dealer or other person, shall not charge such

revised prices in relation to any packages except those packages which bear

marking indicating that they were pre-packed in the month in which such tax has

been revised or fresh tax has been imposed or in the month immediately

following the month aforesaid;

Provided also that where the revised prices are lower than the price marked on

the package, the retail dealer or other person shall not charge any price in

excess of the revised price, irrespective of the month in which the commodity

was pre-packed. ]

(4) Nothing in sub-rule (3) shall apply to a package which is not required, under

these rules to indicate the month and the yegr in which it was pre-packed.

(5) No wholesale dealer or retail dealer or other person shall obliterate, smudge

or alter the retail sale price, indicated by the manufacturer or the packer or the

importer, as the case may be, on the package or on the label affixed thereto.

(6) The manufacturer or packer or the importer shall not alter the price on the

wrapper once printed and used for packing.

(7) All retailers who are covered under the Value Added Tax VAT or Turn Over

Tax (TOT) and dealing in packaged commodities whose net content declaration

is by weight or volume or a combination thereof shall maintain an electronic

weighing machine of at least accuracy class ITI, with smallest division of atleast |

g, with facility to issue a printed receipt indicating among other things, the gross

quantity, price and the like at a prominent place in their retail premises, free of

cost, for the benefit of consumers and the consumers may check the weight of

kok a Corn न plea rm ce “enn ME Me aus mene le 4 I ON RN

| \ ;

=== PAGE 59 ===

[भाग पा--खण्ड 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र ; असाधारण

their packaged commodities purchased from the shop on such machine.

49. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the

manufacturer or packer.--({) With a view to ascertaining whether any

package or lot of packages complies with provisions of these rules in ail respects,

the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer empowered to inspect

under section i5 of the Act (hereafter referred to in these rules as the

“authorized person”) may examine the packages and carry out the tests at the

premises of the manufacturer or where the manufacturer is not the packer, of

the packer and when he carries out such examination or tests, he shall draw

samples from such lot of packages, in such manner and in such number as are

specified in the Fifth Schedule and the tests aforesaid shall be carried out in

accordance with the method specified in the Sixth Schedule.

(2) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter in the Form

set out in the Seventh Schedule, the detailed results of the tests carried out by

him under sub-rule (2) and shall obtain, on the said Form, the signature of the

manufacturer or, as the case may be, of the packer, or his authorized agent, or,

in the absence of both, or on their refusal to affix such signature, the signature

of a competent witness and copy of the data sheet containing the result shall be

given to the manufacturer or packer, as the case may be.

(3) On the completion of the ‘examination and tests carried out under sub-rule

(), the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall make a report

indicating therein his findings with regard to the declarations required to be

made under these rules and as to the net quantity actually contained in the

=== PAGE 60 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Sec. 3(i)]

sample packages and the extent of error, if any, noticed by him and furnish a

copy of such report to the manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be.

(4) If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) that-

(a) the statistical average of the net quantity contained in the packages drawn as

samples is lesser than the quantity declared on the packages or on the labels

affixed thereto; or

(b) any such package shows an error in deficiency greater than the maximum

permissible error, the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, if

for good and sufficient reason, requested by the manufacturer or packer or his

authorized agent, so to do, take out as soon as may be practicable, fresh

samples and carry out fresh tests in accordance with the provisions of these

rules and where fresh tests are made, the Director, Controller or any Legal

Metrology Officer, as the case may be, shall collect a fee of two thousand five

hundred rupees from the manufacturer or packer for carrying out the fresh

tests.

Provided that where fresh tests are carried out, no package contained in the lot,

which was previously tested under this rule, shall be sold or distributed by the

manufacturer or packer, as the case may be, unless the provisions of the sub￾rule (5) or as the case may be, sub-rule (6), are complied with.

(5)(a) where, as a result of any test carried out under this rule, it is found that

any package contained in the lot does not conform to all or any of the provisions

of the Act or of these rules, the manufacturer or the packer shall make a cent

per cent check of the packages contained in the lot and pick out from the lot the

ee ० PEER RRR DCL | दिY... निqधन निqकल नव

=== PAGE 61 ===

[भाग [lars 3003 भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 6]

packages which conform to all the provisions of the Act and of these rules.

(b) When the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied that

the packages picked out by the manufacturer or packer conforms to all the

provisions of the Act and of these rules, he shall authorize the sale, distribution

or delivery of such packages.

(c) Where, as a result of such cent per cent check by the manufacturer or

packer, any package is found to be not conforming to all or any or of the

provisions of the Act or of these rules, such package shall not be sold, distributed

or delivered until it has been re-packed, re-processed or relabeled, as the case

may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Act and of these rules.

(6) A lot of packages shall be approved for sale if, and only if, as a result of the

tests carried out under this rule, it is found that- (a) the statistical average of the

net quantity contained in the sample packages is equal to, or more than, the

quantity declared on the package or on the label affixed thereto.

(b) the extent of error in deficiency in none of such sample packages exceeds

the maximum permissibie error. . © each such package bears thereon or on a label affixed thereto the declaration

required to be made under these rules.

(7) The requirement of mandatory declarations on the packages shall be ensured

either at the factory level or at the depot of the factory.

(8) For non-compliance of the provisions of this rule, action may be taken after

seizing five representative samples of the packages as evidence and the rest of

the packages may be released once compliance is ensured by the manufacturer

=== PAGE 62 ===

@ THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Paar Il—Sec. 3(i)]

or the packer, as the case may be.

20. Action to be taken on completion of inspection of packages at the

premises of the manufacturer or the packer.-

() If it appears from the report referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 49 that,-

(a) the statistical average of the net quantity contained in the packages drawn as

samples under that rule is lesser than the quantity declared on the packages or

on the labels affixed thereto, or any such package shows an error in deficiency

greater than the maximum permissible error, or

(b) any such package does not bear thereon or on label affixed thereto the

declarations to be made under these rules, the Director, Controller or any Legal

Metrology Officer shall take action as given below, namely:-

(i) seize the packages drawn by him as samples and shall take adequate steps

for the safe custody of the seized packages until they are produced in the

appropriate court as evidence;

(ii) based on the evidence initiate action for violations of the provisions of the Act

and these rules:

Provided that no such action shall be taken if fresh tests are carried out under

sub-rule (4) of rule 29, but if after such fresh tests any such error or omission as

is referred to in this sub-rule is detected, the Director, Controller or any Legal

Metrology Officer shall take appropriate action as specified in this sub-rule in

accordance with the provisions of the Act against the manufacturer or, as the

case may be, the packer.

(3) The disposal of the seized packages shall be made in accordance with the

morte Cn. Ue, CeCe +। जन नया ate Hoe ate: ee ee ‘I us ’ का TR ४ 4 दे जद. OES ai tee की

=== PAGE 63 ===

[भाग ए--खण्ड 3003 भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 4973 (2 of 974).

2i. Inspection of quantity and error in packages at the premises of the

wholesale dealer or retail dealer (4) Ordinarily, any test in relation to the net

quantity contained in a package shall not be carried out at the premises of the

retail dealer or the wholesale dealer, unless-

(i). a complaint is received by the Director or the Controller or any Legal

Metrology Officer to the effect that the package sold or delivered to the

complainant does not contain the quantity declared on such package or on the

label affixed thereto;

(ii) the Director or the Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer has reason to

suspect that any package has been tampered with or that there has been any

pilferage or leakage of the commodity contained in the packages;

(iii) the Director or the Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer has reason to

suspect that any package, or any label affixed thereto, does not bear thereon all

or any of the declarations which are required to be made under these rules.

(2) Where any test is carried out in pursuance of the provisions of sub-rule (),

the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall verify whether the

quantity contained in the package corresponds to the quantity declared on such

packages or any label affixed thereto and where quantity contained in package is

less than the declared quantity, whether the deficiency is more than the

maximum permissibie error in relation to that commodity.

(3) Where the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer finds on a test

carried out under this rule that the error in deficiency in any package kept or

=== PAGE 64 ===

a THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—~Sec. 3(i)]

न stored for sale, distribution or delivery at the premises of the retail or wholesale

dealer is more than the maximum permissible error in relation to that

commodity, he shall seize such package and take appropriate action against the

retail dealer or the wholesale dealer, as the case may be, in accordance with the

provisions of the Act:

Provided that where the package bears the legend ‘when packed', no punitive

action shall be taken against the retail dealer or wholesale dealer if the Director,

Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer is satisfied after necessary test that the

deficiency in the net quantity contained in package is due to environmental

conditions.

(4) Where as a result of any test made under this rule, it is found that the net

quantity contained in the package conforms to the declared quantity or where

there is a deficiency, such deficiency is not more than the maximum permissible

error, the retail dealer shall be at liberty to sell or deliver or distribute such

commodity at the price determined on the basis of the quantity found on such

tests.

(5)Where, as a result of any test made under this rule, it is found that any

package, or any label affixed thereto, does not bear thereon all or any of the

declarations required to be made under these rules, it shall be lawful for the

Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer to make such enquiries as to

the source from which such package was received by the whole sale dealer or

the retail dealer as the case may be, as he may think fit.

RSL a RRR Et eae. Oo

=== PAGE 65 ===

[ भाग प--खण्ड 3003 भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

22. Establishment of maximum permissible error on package.-

() The maximum permissible error in relation to the commodities shall be such

as is indicated in the First Schedule.

(2) While establishing the maximum permissible error in relation to the net

quantity of commodities contained in packages, due account shall be taken of

the following causes which may lead to variation in quantity, namely:-

(a) variations caused by unavoidable deviation in weighing, measuring: or

counting the contents of individual packages that may occur in good packaging

practice;

(b) variations caused by the ordinary and customary exposure to conditions,

such as, climate, transport, storage or the like that normally occur in good

distribution practice after the commodity is introduced in trade or commerce;

and

(c) variations due to the nature of packaging material or container.

(3) The Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer shall determine, or

cause to be determined, in relation to any commodity, the declaration in respect

of the net quantity of which is permitted to be qualified by the words ‘when

packed’; the reasonable variations which may take place by reason of the

environmental conditions.

23. Deceptive packages to be repacked or in default to be seized.-

(4) If, on the determination of the quantity contained in the sample packages,

the Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer finds that the quantity

contained in the package agrees with the declaration of the quantity made on

900 GI/—9

=== PAGE 66 ===

6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. आफ

the package or label thereon but the package is a deceptive package, he shall

require the manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, to repack and re￾label such package and in the event of the omission or failure on the part of the

manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, to repack or re-label such

deceptive package, in accordance with the standards established by or under

these rules, seize them, take appropriate punitive action in accordance with the

Act and take adequate steps for the safe custody of such packages until they are

produced in a court as evidence.

Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, ‘deceptive package’ means a package

which is so designed as to deliberately given to the consumer an exaggerated or

misleading impression as to the quantity of the commodity contained therein,

except where bigger dimensions of the package can be justified by the

manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, on the ground that such

dimensions are necessary for giving protection to the commodity contained in

such package or for meeting the requirements of the machine used for filling

such package.

(2) If the seized packages contain any commodity which is subject to speedy or

natural decay, the Director or Controller or the Legal Metrology officer shall

dispose of the commodity in accordance with the rules made under the Act.

CHAPTER III

PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO WHOLESALE PACKAGES

24, Declarations applicable to be made on every wholesale package

BH ee RBA ।.. । “Hemme . ea Mea व. ०. लय थे विs; ५६ कक में सका कपल 49464. मामवकाल- महन्दवाायाकन लक, ie ath if i t

=== PAGE 67 ===

[भाग eve 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

Every wholesale package shall bear thereon a legible, definite, plain and

conspicuous declaration as to —

(a) The name and address of the manufacturer or importer or where the

manufacturer or importer is not the packer, of the packer;

(b) the identity of the commodity contained in the package; and

(c ) the total number of retail package contained in such wholesale package or

the net quantity in terms of standard units of weights, measures or number of

the commodity contained in wholesale package;

Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply in relation to a wholesale package if

a declaration similar to the declarations specified in this rule, is required to be

made on such wholesale packages by or under any other law for the time being

in force.

CHAPTER IV

EXPORT OF PACKAGED COMMODITIES

25. Restrictions on sale of export packages in India.-An export package

shall not be sold in India unless the manufacturer or packer has re-packed or

relabeled the commodity in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter

II, and where any export package is sold in India without such re-packing or re￾labeling, such package shall be liable to be seized in accordance with the

provisions of the Act.

CHAPTER V

EXEMPTIONS

26. Exemption in respect of certain packages.-Nothing contained in these_

=== PAGE 68 ===

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART EXTRAORDINARY _[Parr Ste. 300] आप]

rules shall apply to any package containing a commodity if—

(a) the net weight or measure of the commodity is ten gram or ten millilitre or

less, if sold by weight or measure;

Provided that the declaration in respect of maximum retail price and net quantity

shall be declared on packages containing 0g to 20g or l0ml to 20ml;

(b) any package containing fast food items packed by restaurant or hotel and the

like;

(c) it contains scheduled formulations and non-scheduled formulations covered under the

Drugs (Price Control) Order,l995 made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act,

955 (40 of 955);

(0) agricultural form produces in packages of above 50 kg.

CHAPTER VI

REGISTRATION OF MANUFACTURERS, PACKERS AND IMPORTERS

27. Registration of manufacturers, packers and importers.-

() Every individual, firm, Hindu undivided family, society, company or corporation who or

which pre-packs or imports any commodity for sale, distribution or delivery shall make an

application, accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred, to the Director or the Controller

for the registration of his or its name and complete address; and every such application shall

be made,-

(i) in the case of an applicant pre-packing or importing any commodity on the date of

commencement of these rules, within a period of ninety days from such commencement; or

(ii) in the case of any applicant who or which commences pre-packing or importing of any

commodity after the commencement of these rules, within ninety days from the date on

which he or it commences such pre-packing.

(2) Every application referred in sub-rule ([) shall contain the following particulars, namely:-

=== PAGE 69 ===

[ भाग [[--खण्ड 300] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण

(a) the name of the applicant;

(b) the complete address of the premises at which the pre-packing or import of one or more

commodities is made by the applicant; and

(c) the name of the commodity or commodities pre-packed or imported by the applicant.

Explanation: In this sub-rule, ‘complete address’ has the meaning assigned to it in the

explanation to sub-rule () of rule 0.'

(3) For making any alteration in the registration certificate issued under sub rule (4), a fee of

rupees one hundred shall be paid by the concerned manufacturer or packer or importer to

the Director or Controller.

(4) On receipt of the application made under sub-rule (), the Director or Controller, who

shail be the Registering Authority, shall-

(a) if the application is not complete in all respects, return the same to the applicant within a

period of seven working days from the date of receipt of the application;

(b) if the application is complete in all respects, register the applicant and grant a

registration certificate to the applicant to that effect.

28. Registration of shorter address permissible.-() It shall be lawful for any

manufacturer or packer to make an application to the Director or the Controller for the

registration of a shorter address, in addition to the complete address referred to in sub-rule

(2) of rule 27.

(2) The Director or the Controller may, if he is satisfied after inquiry that the shorter address

is sufficient to enable the consumer or any other person to identify the manufacturer or the

packer, register such shorter address.

(3) Where a shorter address is registered by the Director or the Controller, it shall be lawful

=== PAGE 70 ===

n THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Sec. 3(i)]

for the manufacturer or packer to state such shorter address on the label of each commodity

pre-packed by him or it.

29. Registration of manufacturers and packers, etc.-

() The Director or the Controller shall enter in a register, to be maintained by him for the

Purpose, the name and complete address of each manufacturer or packer by whom

application for such registration has been made to him under rule 27. .

(2)The register referred to in sub-rule (4) shall be open to the inspection of the public

without payment of any fee.

30. Compilation of lists of manufacturers or packers and their circulation. The

Director/ Controller shall compile a State-wise list of the manufacturers and packers

registered by him under rule 29 and shall circulate such fist to the Controller of the

concerned State to enable the Controller to take, or cause to be taken, samples at the

premises of the manufacturer or, where the manufacturer is not the packer, of the packer.

CHAPTER VII

GENERAL

34... () Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale price of the pre-packaged commodity

shall contain a declaration as to the net quantity or number of the commodity contained in

the package.

(2)The font size of the net quantity in the advertisement shall be same as that of retail sale

price.

32, Penalty for contravention of Rules

(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of rules 27 to 3i, he shall be punished with fine of

four thousand rupees.

loo bd HD qm i a aia ck a hai RCE rn rer लक । 4. ५४, ‘hs QIN

